Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes and
today I'm joined by Doctor Lauren Ross. She's an
associate professor in the logic and philosophy of Science
department at the University of California, Irvine. Her research
concerns explanation and causation in biology, neuroscience and medicine,
and she is also the author of a recent
book, explanation in Biology for the Cambridge University Press
Element series. So, and today we're going to talk
about causation and explanation in science and the life
sciences, more specifically, or with the focus on the
life sciences. So, Doctor Ross, welcome to the show.
It's a big pleasure to everyone.
It's a huge pleasure to be here. Thank you
for the invitation.
So let's start perhaps with the most basic question
here. So, what is causation?
There is a short answer and a longer answer,
and the the short answer is that causation is
control. So causes are factors that provide control over
their effects. Causal information should give us information about
control. Control in the world and factors in the
world that have that kind of influence. So that's
the short answer. The longer answer is that X
is a cause of Y, some kind of candidate
factor is a cause of some effective interest. If
it were the case that intervening on X, that
candidate cause, and changing it or wiggling it gives
you control over the effective interest. So if you
were to intervene on a factor in an ideal
way, and there's more to say about that. That
intervention on the candidate cause, if it is really
a cause, it should give you control over the
effect of interest and values of the effect or
the kind of presentation of the effect. The this
is the interventionist account of causation. It's a very
commonly used account of causality in philosophy of science.
It's based on scientific work, scientific methodology. It's based
on the notion of a kind of unconfounded experimental
manipulation, which is a way that scientists identify causal
relationships and The interventionist account doesn't require that we
are actually able to intervene on a factor in
order for it to be a cause. What it
requires is that we have evidence that if it
were to be intervened upon, it would give control
over the effect. So there's a, there's a short
answer and a long answer to. IS causation, and
of course the long answer um is much longer
depending on kind of further questions, but this is
captured with an interventionist account of causation.
And within philosophy and more specifically the philosophy of
science, what is causation part of? Is it part
of epistemology, metaphysics, or some other area?
There is interest in causality in many different areas
of philosophy. And areas like metaphysics, epistemology. Ontology. And
you know, philosophers have been interested in causation and
scientists have been interested in causation for a very
long time, so you'll find That there's debate about
what kind of area causation falls under. For me,
the best work on causation that we have involves
a couple of these together. So if If someone
suggests that causation is best understood exclusively in terms
of metaphysics, usually the suggestion is that They're thinking
of causation as exclusively kind of in the world
in some kind of fundamental way that doesn't involve.
A human or a scientist or someone kind of
intervening on the world or a scientist. If someone
is thinking of it in a purely epistemological way,
they're usually more focused on the agent or the
scientist or the human, you know, or a nonhuman
animal interacting with the world, and they don't have
as much of the, they don't have as much
of the world in the picture. It's a little
bit more the The agent and the individual and
in that sense it makes it seem like causation
is a little bit more just in their head.
For me, the best work on causation involves both
causation is something in the world, but it's also
something that you can't clearly define unless you talk
about how we engage with the world and how
we identify it in the world and how we
study the world. So it involves both. Human causal
cognition. Uh, OFTEN in these cases, right, in scientific
context, a human scientist who is performing special. Using
special methods to identify causation in the world, but
it's very much in the world. So for me,
it involves a kind of Metaphysics aspect because it's
really out there, but it also involves this epistemological
aspect or what is sometimes called a methodological aspect
where It also requires our success and the methods
we use to identify it and to study it.
So for me it's a blend of both and
Often more in the camp of a kind of
methodological focus and more of an epistemological one, but
an epistemological focus that includes a kind of at
least a light metaphysics where we're definitely talking about
the objective causal structure of the world, but appreciating
that you can't really talk about that unless you
include. The how how we do that, how humans
navigate the world in our everyday lives causally and
how scientists study causation, so. The best accounts blend
um a couple of these frameworks together.
But when scientists talk about causality, are they all
and always talking about the same thing or
not? Good, so. What's very clear and I think
what's very important for philosophers and scientists who are.
Who are interested in causality is to appreciate the
sense in which scientists use many different types of
causal terms and concepts when they talk about the
causes that are out there and the causes that
they study. Um, THEY talk about causes that are
deterministic versus probabilistic, distal versus proximal. They talk about
causes that are triggering versus structuring. More complex causal
concepts like mechanism, pathway, cascade. They talk about circuits,
so they use a very rich causal terminology, and
it appears as though they're using this rich diverse
terminology to refer to rich, diverse, and different types
of causes in the world. For me, when I
study scientific work in the life sciences, biology, neuroscience,
medicine, ecology, even the social sciences, part of what
I find is that they're often using the same
definition of causation, a kind of basic definition in
terms of control, like we discussed earlier, but they're
making distinctions within causation. They're distinguishing types within this
framework of causation as control. They're interested in causes
that give different types of control as a way
to think about it. So when they talk about
deterministic or probabilistic causation or causes that are structuring
or triggering. They're often using this basic definition that's
the same causation in terms of control, but what
differs are these extra features of causes, causal relationships,
and causal systems where those, I call them secondary
features, those can differ quite a bit. Right, the
cause can produce its effect on different time scales.
The speed of causal influence can be different. It
can boost the probability of an outcome to different
degrees. Its strength can be different. Those are, those
are differences that capture what Woodward has called distinctions
within causation. And so part of what is helpful
here. Is a philosopher, I think can help clarify
that difference between defining causation and distinctions within causation.
We want to capture that plurality of causes that
scientists study, but it doesn't mean that because they're
talking about different types of causes, they're using a
different definition. They're in my kind of study they're
using often the same basic definition of causation, just
control, but then there's these extra distinctions on top
of that that capture further differences. So they do
scientists certainly talk about different types of causes, causal
relationships and causal systems, and Um, and it's part
of the important work for scientists to do and
philosophers to do is to specify what exactly those
are, how, what are the features, and why do
they matter for the explanations that we give and
for the way that we reason about the world.
So you mentioned there uh causes, uh, I mean,
different kinds of causes like deterministic and probabilistic causes,
proximal versus distal causes, structuring versus triggering causes, and
then you also mentioned the mechanisms, pathways, circuits, cascades.
Uh, I mean, I don't think it's necessary for
us to go through. All of them here, but
in particularly in the, since we're going to talk
about the life sciences, in the case of mechanisms,
pathways, cascades, processes, circuits, I mean, what do these
terms mean exactly in the context of biology, for
example, and how do they relate to causation?
Perfect. Well. There's, there's interesting kind of topics in
this space because part of what we find is
that in biology and neuroscience, and often many other
sciences as well. One causal concept that often shows
up is the notion of a mechanism, and it's
often viewed as a very high status term. It's
interesting because you see in there's a recent paper
that Danny Bassett and I published where we discuss
how in grant calls and neuroscience and in The
journal publication guidelines for top neuroscience journals, it's often
suggested that if a researcher is going to get
their work funded and get it published, what they
need to do is they need to provide mechanistic
insights and they need to identify mechanisms. Um, WHAT'S
interesting though is that editors are pretty quick to
say that they can't tell researchers what counts as
a mechanism, and also what you find is that
when scientists in these fields are reviewing a paper
or a grant, they often completely disagree on whether
the same paper has provided mechanistic insights or not.
So part of what we see here is the
use of a causal concept. And one that's viewed
as the kind of status concept of the field,
it's very important, but there's no agreement on how
it should be defined and in fact, part of
what we discussed in that paper. Is that mechanism
means different things to different people. It's basically defined
in different ways. So part of why this work
is important is that if a causal concept is
to have meaning and in order for scientists to
kind of theorize clearly in order for us to
capture the kind of causes that That matter in
a given field and the kind of work that
should be supported. It needs to be very clear
first what's meant by causality and also what kinds
of causal systems scientists should be finding and that
they do find in their work. And so essentially
a first thing to point out is that in
many cases causal terms are used loosely. But a
single term can refer to different things or in
some cases different terms can refer to the same
thing. So an important job of a philosopher of
science is to get clarity on You know, there's
a kind of semantic issue of just the words
we're using, and then there's a very feet on
the ground. Um, OBJECTIVE, important, you know, precision issue
of what kind of causes. Do we care about
in science and what kind of causes matter, so.
We can get clarity on that when we look
at more specific ways in which the mechanism term
is used and other terms like, you know, deterministic
causes or probabilistic ones. The traditional notion of mechanism
is more of a machine-like notion. Where mechanism is
a system that has lower level causal parts, kind
of like a car engine or a watch mechanism,
where you've got physical causal parts, close proximity, they
interact and they're at a lower level and they
produce a higher level outcome. So in that case,
the kind of more traditional notion of mechanism is
a causal system that is similar to a machine.
Mechanism is analogized to machines, and you do see
this in many scientific domains. The side point is
that um that traditional notion has kind of ballooned
out and expanded beyond the machine metaphor, but that
was the more, that was the original notion, and
it still is the kind of default view in
many cases. So, mechanisms of gene expression, machine-like notion.
Pathway, interestingly, A developmental pathways, metabolic pathways. Here the
causal system is analogized to something different, not a
machine, but roadways and highways. Pathways give you this
possibility space along which something can kind of travel
or move. So that's very different from lower level
interacting parts. Here it's a set of available routes
that a system can travel along. Blood vessels is
a nice example, vascular pathways. Right, the blood can
flow along different routes. So that's pathway cascade is
its own unique causal system. BLOOD coagulation cascade, cell
signaling cascades. These are analogized to a waterfall or
a snowball effect. And as you can kind of
see in those everyday life examples, there's amplification, so
a cascade. Explodes. There's a small causal trigger and
it produces this huge explosive effect. Natural disasters are
sometimes called failure cascades or cascading disasters, so you
have a single earthquake that that causes, you know,
different, that damages different things. It breaks roadways, water
pipes, and then those just cause many more. It's
sort of a one to many causal relationship. You
amplify. The downstream effects given this like initial trigger
snowball effect, and then circuits is another one. Circuits,
of course, are commonly discussed in neuroscience and also
engineering or electronic contexts when you think of an
electric circuit. And what's interesting is here you can
see neuroscientists are interested in. Neural systems, they talk
about them as operating at a kind of higher
level. The circuit doesn't involve all of the lower
level details of ions and ion channels and single
neurons. It's more of this higher level. Mesoscale they'll
often call it circuits like a wiring diagram where
you see these neurons or neural tracts that are
connected together and there's a computational aspect like a
computer. The system is getting this input from its
environment and it's computing what's going to happen and
then there's an output. There's this more complex behavior.
So part of what we see is that scientists,
when they're talking about causal systems, they often analogize
them to systems in everyday life that have similar
features like machines, roadways, snowball effect, waterfalls, and then
circuits in. Electronic situations and so part of what
is helpful about those analogies is they pick out
the unique features of these different systems and how
it is that they differ, how it is that
scientists study them based on those differences, and then
the unique types of explanations that we can provide
when we understand those unique features, but the basic
idea we kind of come back to is that
There's different types of causal systems in the world,
and we need to be able to capture that.
If you call all of them mechanisms, it's sort
of like. That's fine, but we need to then
distinguish between different types of mechanisms. So it isn't
so much about the word that's used, but clearly
saying what are the features of these systems? Do
they have lower level causal parts close spatial proximity?
Do they amplify? Do they involve a computational aspect?
And so, Um, what's interesting is that as a
philosopher of science, when you're looking at many different
scientific fields, you see the same causal terms show
up. Across different domains, and they're often used in
a similar kind of way. So biologists also talk
about circuits, circuit motifs, the cascade concept we find
in physics as well. And so it's helpful to
be able to kind of compare the causal language
and causal systems that scientists identify across different domains,
um, and to Kind of Identify and provide this
clarity on what the features of these causal systems
are.
So we have all these different kinds of causation
in science. When we are asking a specific kind
of scientific question that involves causation, is there a
proper type of causation to be found out for
each specific question?
Yes, the, the way that we, I mean, We
can't really identify causes that matter for a situation
or a phenomenon or an explanatory target of interest
until we say what that explanatory target or phenomenon
is, so a good amount of legwork. That's involved
in identifying causes in the world is to in
many cases first specify what's the effect of interest.
What does a scientist want to understand? Do they
want to understand Different differences in height across genetically
identical plants. Do they want to understand what causes
different eye colors in humans or in fruit flies?
What is it that they want to, do they
want to understand a disease, right? What causes a
particular disease in humans? So a lot of the
legwork is actually involved in first providing a clear
effect or a clear explanatory target that you that
you use to Um, and you fix to then
ask, OK, if this is my target of interest,
what are the causes that control this outcome? What
are the factors that if they were to change,
provide changes to this effective interest and Sometimes scientists
are still working on clearly specifying the effect of
the outcome, and they can't yet get to the
causal question because, for example, if they're interested in
consciousness, there isn't. A clear definition they all agree
on or if it's a psychiatric condition or disease
again it's hard to get. A kind of concise
characterization of the effect, but if it's something like
eye color, that's a little more straightforward, it's a
little easier. So different types of phenomena in the
world are are more or less tractable to Kind
of being able to measure them, to specify them,
and that's a very important first step in identifying
the causes. So one way that Identifying causes in
the world or causal relationships in the world works
is you fix the effect and you search for
the causes. In other cases, you might focus on
the causes first and just start intervening on things
to see what what's being produced, but even in
that latter. We you still need some kind of
specification of what is the cause that you're intervening
on. And so this kind of nicely relates to
um scientific methodology and having clear cause and effect
variables to begin with, and that's another kind of
helpful aspect of this framework um getting very clear
on what the properties in the world are that
we're interested in is necessary before we can start
talking about. Whether different properties are causally related or
not.
So let's get into the topic of explanation now
and then also relate causation to explanation. So first
of all, what is scientific explanation?
Scientific explanation is a. Project that Scientists engage in
that philosophers are very interested in. Philosophers distinguish different
things that scientists do. Scientists do all sorts of
important things. They provide descriptions of the world. They
classify stuff in the world. They make predictions, and
they give explanations. Those are just 4 things. Giving
an explanation involves answering a why question about something
in the world that involves explaining often why it
happened or what's responsible for that phenomenon, and giving
an explanation is both an answer to a why
question that gives deep understanding of the world. Giving
a description of something is, is often very, it's
much easier. I can describe plants in the world.
By sort of just looking at them, but that
doesn't mean I have an explanation for why the
plants have certain features. I can classify them again
without explaining anything about them. And in many cases
we can also make predictions without being able to
explain why something occurs. So explanation is viewed as
An important aspect of science. Sometimes it's viewed as
one of the most important things that scientists do.
It's something that provides deep understanding of the world,
and it answers these why questions like why is
it the case that the sky is blue, that
this patient has a disease and another doesn't, or
why is it the case that, you know, my
eye color is this color versus another? So there
is and has been debate about the special features
that need to be present to know that a
scientist is giving a legitimate explanation, but you could
also see how this matters for capturing what's special
about science. If science gives us our best understanding
of the world and if science gives us real
genuine explanations, unlike other Other things outside of science,
then what is it that's so special about them?
And so then there's a lot of work on.
With the hallmark features or the kind of criteria
that need to be met for a scientist to
give a real genuine explanation, but you can already
start to see how explanations are viewed as distinct
from other important things that scientists do and other
important models that they have. If they have a
model that's predictive, that doesn't yet mean it's explanatory,
or if they have a classification system that doesn't
yet mean that they've explained something about the world.
Um, ALTHOUGH they've sorted objects into different categories, um,
that's viewed as distinct from explaining why something in
the world is a certain way.
Uh, ARE all scientific explanations causal or are there
also non-causal scientific explanations?
There's debate about this in philosophy, and I think
there's both types, causal and non-causal. The field has
been very interested and focused on causal explanation for
a while now. Philosophy has been very focused on
causal explanation because it looks like scientists often give
causal explanations. It's a very common way that scientists
explain. The idea there is that causes explain their
effects. So if we want to explain a disease.
Right, what's, what explains why someone has scurvy or
not? Well, you cite this cause. It's the explanation
of scurvy is that someone lacks a dietary vitamin
C, and you know, the same goes for genetic
diseases. If you want to explain it, you cite
the cause. So causes explain their effects. And it's,
it's very easy to see many examples of this
all across the sciences. What's come up more recently
in philosophical work is interest in whether there are
other explanations that aren't causal exclusively. And a common
large class of these are explanations that involve a
mathematical piece, but it's a special kind of mathematical
piece. It's a, it's an explanation where you need
math, and the math isn't just representing stuff in
the world. It's not, I mean, math can represent
causal relationships, so it's can't be math, it's representing
causality, but there's this mathematical dependency. That is said
to exist in some explanations. Where it's a mathematical
relationship, not an empirical one, and it's suggested that
there are some explanations, like evolutionary explanations, for example,
um, and many others, where there's causal information that
you need for the explanation, but you can't give
the explanation with causality alone. You also need this
mathematical piece. And so in cases where you need
A mathematical piece for explanatory power or for for
providing an explanation. Those are viewed as examples where
explanations aren't exclusively causal. And In that book that
you mentioned at the beginning of the interview, this
Cambridge University press book on explanation and biology, the
book is actually divided into causal explanation and non-causal
explanation. So that book goes into detail about different
types in each of these categories. But in philosophy
of science, causal explanation has gotten The most attention
for quite a while and it's more recent work
that has been interested in in examined non-causal types
of explanation. They're sometimes called mathematical explanations, and so
that book has more examples of types in this
category, but there's important work on non-causal explanation by
Robert Batterman. By Mark Lang, by um Pincock, and,
and many others. So it's a very much an
interesting current topic and philosophy of science.
And does each type of causation imply a particular
type of explanation? What is the link between causation
and explanation?
Good. So, I think the most helpful way to
think about it is And yeah, this is a
this is a nice question. So there's different types
of causes in the world. There's different types of
causal systems. Does that mean there's different types of
causal explanation? There's a sense in which all of
those explanations are causal, but in order to explain
something, we often have to pick out which are
the causes that matter the most for an outcome.
And sometimes the causes that matter the most are
You know, a mechanism at a lower level, sometimes
it's a pathway, sometimes it's a cascade. So I
would say all of those examples fall into this
general category of causal explanation. But When we're interested
in causal explanations, right, suppose you fix an explanatory
target, it's, you know, eye color in a fruit
fly or something. You need to identify to give
an explanation. You need to identify causes that are
relevant to the outcome, but there's a ton of
them out there in the world. One of the
challenges of providing Explanations in science, causal explanations, is
you've got to sort through a massive set of
causes and pick out the ones that matter the
most. This is sometimes called causal selection in philosophy.
How does a scientist select the causes that matter
the most? The kind of funny philosophical discussions of
this topic are suppose you could go all the
way back in the causal history to the Big
Bang, or you can go all the way down
causally to fundamental physics. There's a David Lewis says
there's an infinite set of causes in the world
for any outcome of interest. Even if we don't
think going all the way back or all the
way down is compelling, we still have these cases
where, you know, neuroscience or biology, there's a massive
number of causally relevant things. How do you pick
the causes that matter the most, right? I mean,
we can't cite all of them, and we don't
think we need to. We don't, I mean, we
definitely don't need to go all the way back
to the Big Bang to explain everything, or it
doesn't matter for explaining everything on the planet or
all the phenomena we're interested in. So part of
What's important here in capturing scientific methodology and scientific
explanation is giving principled reasons for how scientists do
that selection process. And causation at base is control,
but there's different types of control that often matter
more than others, and that allows scientists to pick
certain causes that give some types of control that
are valued and thought to be more explanatory. So
there's this really kind of nice space of being
able to say and specify what are the principal
reasons and kind of guidelines that scientists use. When
they pick out relevant causes for an explanatory target
of interest, sometimes they pick out a single main
cause. Probably rarely, there's some monocausal diseases. Usually there's
many causes, but they're still abstracting and kind of
leaving out lots of detail and lots of information.
So this is where those distinctions within causation matter.
They might pick a cause because it's more deterministic
than another or it's stronger than another or it's
more stable. It's a cause that generalizes better across
the context that they're interested in. And then there's
this just very rich space of. First, capturing causal
distinctions and then seeing which ones matter to a
scientist in given context based on their explanatory question
and the kind of system they're interested in.
So you focus your work on biology, neuroscience and
medicine. Are there commonalities in terms of the types
of causation we see across them and in the
types of explanation that people usually seek in each
of the scientific fields?
Yes, there's a ton of commonality. There's even commonality
beyond those sciences. When you look at ecology, and
you compare it to neuroscience, biology, and in some
cases, social sciences as well, and then there are
important differences. In neuroscience, I find there's often much
more of a focus on computation than in biology.
We're often seeing that neuroscientists are interested in how
neurons are processing information. And there's very complex also
targets of interest in neuroscience. You want to explain
this complex behavior. The organism is put in this
environment. Something unique happens and they respond with this
very complex emotional outcome or there's a reflex that
they very quickly discharge. It's like this very physical
reflex based on negative stimulus and Those are different
from many cases in biology where we don't talk
about physiological systems always as information processing, and sometimes
the explanatory targets are less higher level, they're more
at a lower level. It's is this hormone produced
or not? What are the levels at which it's
produced? And Um, yeah, there's sometimes there is discussion
of some computational features in biology, but just not
at the same degree and not at the same
complexity as we see in neuroscience and in medicine,
of course, the focus isn't so much on function.
In biology, the focus is often on function. How
is the system functioning to produce this this outcome?
That needs to happen for the organism to survive.
It's producing something that oscillates, where in medicine we
often think of something has broken and maybe there's
a kind of main cause or set of causes
that has disrupted the system and What are those
kind of main causal factors that are relevant in
this case and that are doing that? Is there
a gene variant? Is there an environmental toxin or
an environmental factor? Is there something at a higher
scale, a neuron that's not functioning in a certain
kind of way? So there there are differences that
depend on differences across the systems, but there's a
lot of, I mean, one thing we see is
that that same kind of basic causation in terms
of control that shows up across all of these
contexts, but then part of what we need is
You know, it's very It's not, it's important to
distinguish causation from correlation with the control feature, but
we often want to know a lot more about
the systems, and so knowing, knowing more about them
often involves these distinctions within causation, but then just
also differences across the systems and being attentive to
that is important for a philosopher of science and
um. It involves a good amount of leg work
because you have to be. Aware of differences across
the fields, and it's also helpful to talk to
scientists in each of these domains to get a
sense of what matters to them. What are the
types of causation and explanatory targets that they're interested
in, and then how can we kind of clarify.
OF those systems that matter, that are out there
in the world, and that that matter for the
methods that they use, the explanations they provide, and
then just getting an understanding of different types of
systems in the world and in the life sciences.
So I would like to ask you now about
the topic of causal complexity. So, what is causal
complexity and how does it manifest in the domain
of psychiatry and psychiatric illness?
Good. There's all types of causal complexity in psychiatry
and other domains as well, of course. There are
two common types of causal complexity that I've studied
in my work and that are sometimes not easily
distinguished from one another, and they are called multi-causality
and causal heterogeneity. So Multicausality refers to a situation
where many causes are all working together to produce.
An outcome, a psychiatric disease, any kind of outcome.
You can think of this as contrasted with a
monocausal model where there's one main cause for a
disease. Interestingly, in the history of medicine, the monocausal
model was an important step in medical understanding and
medical history. It starts with the germ theory, Robert
Koch. There's Koch's postulates. There's one main. Bacteria that
is the cause of one main disease, right? He,
he identified that with anthrax, cholera, tuberculosis, and so
this big important breakthrough in the history of medicine
was identifying that diseases often have single main causes,
and part of what has happened since then is
realizing Those are the more easy cases. Psychiatric diseases
and others as well are causally complex in ways
that differ from that monocausal model, one cause one
effect. One way that we see they differ is
many causes for an effect, and here are just
many causes that work together. So if you have
a disease that requires a gene variant and a
dietary factor both together, that's at least two causes
that are required. And you know, diseases like PKU
fit that model. When we think of diabetes, type
2 diabetes, there's more than one cause. There's like
many factors that come together psychiatric diseases, many of
them certainly look much more like the multi-causal model
where you have many causes. So one type of
causal complexity is multicausality, but there's a different type
that is a little harder to distinguish from that,
and it's causal heterogeneity. And causal heterogeneity refers to
a situation where different patients with the same disease
get it as a result of completely different causes
or different combinations of causes. So in early work
example of this is early work on Parkinson's disease
showed that there were different causes that were individually
sufficient to produce the same disease. In some cases
it was a single gene. In other cases, it
was a single environmental factor. There were toxins that
could actually produce this, these Parkinsonian features, and in
other cases they are combinations of lower level genes
and environmental factors. So, That's a different kind of
model because basically, It's causally heterogeneous in the sense
that there are heterogeneous or different causes or combinations
that are individually sufficient to produce the exact same
disease. What's interesting about that second type. I it
makes it a lot harder to identify the causes
of a disease in the first place, because when
you group together patients with the disease presentation and
then you search for what they have in common,
they don't need to have the causal. The causal
process in common because they could have different causal
processes that produce the same outcome. So it's actually
a lot harder to identify causes in that situation
versus the other because there isn't a shared causal.
The story that all the patients have in the
causal heterogeneity case. And what's interesting is that in
medicine, medical researchers don't like causal heterogeneity and when
that was discovered with Parkinson's disease, they suggested, you
know, these are different diseases we should divide them
up based on the different causes that are individually
sufficient to produce it. So there's often an expectation
in medicine that if you have a disease category.
You don't have causal heterogeneity within it. You have
causal homogeneity or all the patients should have some
shared causal process that produces the disease. And so
there's there's more to say about how multi-causality and
causal heterogeneity are kind of related, but Causal heterogeneity
is a little bit more population level. You're looking
at different patients with the same effect. Multi-causality, you
know, it's, you're just in one case there's many
causes. It's another question whether across all of the
cases it's the same set, but those are two
types of causal complexity that show up in psychiatric
contexts.
So, I have one last topic that I would
like to ask you about. Uh, ARE there issues
with how scientists and science communicators talk about causality
when they present their work to the general public?
Talking about causation to the general public is challenging.
Talking about causation to scientists is challenging for all
sorts of reasons. And um. And that has to
happen before scientists can talk about their work to
the public, I think, right? If we're not clear
on what we mean by causation in science, or
what we mean by something like Causally deterministic or
mechanism or sufficient causes if we don't have a
clear understanding of what's meant by those causal terms
or if they're used in different ways, then it's
really hard to bring them to the public. And
Um, part of what I find is that there
is a lot of really helpful clarity that can
be provided when you bring philosophy and science together.
And when we use these kind of clear frameworks
for causation in philosophy to see what matters to
scientists and what they're referring to, sometimes what I
find is that scientists have causal standards that are
too high. And they wouldn't, they'll say them, but
they, they'll backtrack maybe later. For example, they'll sometimes
say that they expect causes should always produce their
effects. That's a standard that seems way too high.
If that's our standard, then almost nothing counts as
causal, and then we can't say, you know, smoking
is a cause of lung cancer, which most of
us would agree with. So sometimes the standards that
are suggested are too high. And in other cases
they're too low. Sometimes necessity is confused with causality
where something is necessary in a context, but that
alone doesn't mean that it's causal for an outcome
or an important cause. So there the standards are
sort of too low. So part of what we
need. In my view, is communication among scientists and
maybe philosophers of science, theoreticians who are interested in
science, where scientists can sit down and say, what
are the causal standards in their field. Um, IT'S,
it's very clear that they care about causality. They
want to identify it. They talk about identifying causal
structure in all of these domains. Causation is very
important, right? It supports explanations. It supports identifying what's
responsible for an outcome. It supports interventions that change
things, make things better, treat, treat diseases. Um, SO
it's very important, but getting clear on the kind
of causation that we need, that's where the harder
work, but you know, tractable questions arise. So, so
first I think getting clear on the scientific standards
is helpful, and then In communicating to the public
or any audience, I think it's always important to
think of who the audience is, who they are.
And Causation is notoriously difficult to discuss with Um,
well, it's a, it's a, it's a topic that
sounds very abstract. So, and when someone is used
to academic contexts, both in science or philosophy, there's
almost a little bit of a hindrance here because
You know all of these distinctions, and you might
forget what your audience is aware of as their
kind of background. Um, SO I think. Knowing your
audience, Knowing their basic. Um, WHAT they associate the
topic with, what, what is causation for them? What
have they heard about it? They've probably heard correlation
isn't causation, so that might be a helpful place
to start. And of course, you know, there's a
lot of jargon in science and philosophy that you
just shouldn't use, but it's a, it's a really
important task to work on because I think it
actually helps academics clarify what matters about their work
because that's what you have to partly tell the
public and the justification for it. Philosophers are very
focused on that, so I think they can be
useful to scientists here. I'm used to being able
and needing to say. How does this kind of
science give us understanding of the world? What justifies
it? What are the assumptions involved? But clear communication
here involves some somewhat basic things, which is. Uh,
ATTENTION to the words you use, very precise, clear
definitions of them, and probably, uh, right, and the
audience, right, who the audience is, and then also
probably just fewer messages or what are the main
messages that You think it's important to start with.
And There's uh many great topics to do this
with, but causation is a really important one because
it's so central to science. Um, THERE'S a lot
of. Scientists using causal terminology and methods to study
causation and so. Um THERE'S a lot of potential
to clarify these different types of causes and distinctions
with the causation that matter. Um, AND there's a
lot of important work to do here, and certainly
more of it as more of it as well.
Great. So, Doctor Ross, just before we go, would
you like to let people know where they can
find you and your work on the internet?
Absolutely. I'm pretty easy to find with a basic
Google search of Lauren Ross philosophy or philosophy of
science. My webpage has a good amount of information
about papers on the topics that we discussed today
and many other topics. And um that's also a
place where you can find various social media accounts
and um and various talks that are happening.
Great. So thank you so much for coming on
the show. It's been a real pleasure to talk
with you.
Uh, PLEASURE has been all mine. Thank you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called in Holbrookfield
governor, Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnsergoro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Jonathan Labrant John Jasent and the
Samuel Corriere, Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus
Fran David Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego
Londono Correa. Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn
Pavlostaevskynalebaa medicine, Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza,
Julian Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca
Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani
Smith John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau,
Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David
Williams, the Acosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior, Old Heringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert
Grassy Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark
Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller,
Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular
John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Net. A special thanks
to my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas
Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni
Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers
Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.